Build guide: validation (#520)
holochain/docs-pages: src/pages/build/validation.md

:::

::: intro
Validation gives shape to your [DNA](/build/dnas/)'s data model. It defines the 'rules of the game' for a network --- who can create, modify, or delete data, and what that data should and shouldn't look like. It's also the basis for Holochain's peer-auditing security model.
:::

You implement your validation logic in your application's [integrity zomes](/build/zomes/#integrity). While [entry and link types](/build/working-with-data/) enumerate the kinds of data the integrity zome defines, the data is just bytes until your validation logic gives it some shape and purpose.

A DNA uses validation logic in two ways:

1. By an author of data, to protect them from publishing invalid data, and
2. By an agent that's received data to store and serve, to equip them to detect invalid data and take action against the author.

Because every peer has the DNA's validation logic on their own machine and is expected to check the data they author before they publish it, it can be assumed that invalid data is (almost) always an intentionally malicious act.

!!! info

> Currently Holochain can inform agents about invalid data when asked. In the future it'll also take automatic defensive action by putting a malicious author into an agent's network block list when they see evidence of invalid data.

Reviewer: Is that not already happening? It's supposed to be the case that we block people. The missing piece was warrants so that agents would be properly blocked in a sharded network where not everyone would see the invalid ops to discover that the agent needed blocking.

Author: I dunno; I thought blocking was hidden behind a feature flag. Is that only for coordinator-level blocking?

Reviewer: It probably is hidden in the HDK because it's not properly tested but it's all one feature and Holochain should be free to use it.

Looking at the workflows though, I don't see it happening. It logs that a peer is going to be blocked and doesn't do it... I'm going to try and tell myself I'm looking in the wrong place so I'm not grumpy about this all weekend but that looks a lot like another gap in Holochain.

---
title: "Validation"
---

::: topic-list
### In this section {data-no-toc}

* Validation (this page)
    * [`genesis_self_check` Callback](/build/genesis-self-check-callback/) --- writing a function to control access to a network
    * [`validate` Callback](/build/validate-callback/) --- basic callback, examples using stub functions
    * [DHT operations](/build/dht-operations/) --- advanced details on the underlying data structure used in DHT replication and validation
:::

::: intro
Validation gives shape to your [DNA](/build/dnas/)'s data model. It defines the 'rules of the game' for a network --- who can create, modify, or delete data, and what that data should and shouldn't look like. It's also the basis for Holochain's peer-auditing security model.
:::

> You implement your validation logic in your application's [integrity zomes](/build/zomes/#integrity). While [entry and link types](/build/working-with-data/) enumerate the kinds of data the integrity zome defines, the data is just bytes until your validation logic gives it some shape and purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You implement your validation logic in your application's [integrity zomes](/build/zomes/#integrity).
```
IMO this is more confusing than clarifying.

Author: It feels like important information. Maybe it's in the wrong spot?

Author: Moved it out of here but added it elsewhere: https://github.com/holochain/docs-pages/pull/520/commits/34da873e10bb198abaababea0cf6274cc6d0e63f

A DNA uses validation logic in two ways:

1. By an author of data, to protect them from publishing invalid data, and
2. By an agent that's received data to store and serve, to equip them to detect invalid data and take action against the author.

> Because every peer has the DNA's validation logic on their own machine and is expected to check the data they author before they publish it, it can be assumed that invalid data is (almost) always an intentionally malicious act.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because every peer has the DNA's validation logic on their own machine and is expected to check the data they author before they publish it, it can be assumed that invalid data is always an intentionally malicious act.
```

Is there a case where a user can write invalid data unintentionally?

Author: yes -- unintentional chain forks -- but of course this is not something that app validation logic can catch. Is this too pedantic here?

Reviewer 2: The only time chain forks can occur unintentionally is during countersigning, right? So yes I would not mention it as countersigning is not stable.

Author: Oh, I guess countersigning too -- the classic case Art talks about, though, is losing your source chain and restoring from a backup that was missing the most recent records.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, well since validation treats it as malicious and we don't have a stable feature for reverting unintentional chain forks right now, I'd say leave it out.

Maybe it could be rephased as:

> Because every peer has the DNA's validation logic on their own machine and is expected to check the data they author before they publish it, **invalid data is treated as** an intentionally malicious act

!!! info
Currently Holochain can inform agents about invalid data when asked. In the future it'll also take automatic defensive action by putting a malicious author into an agent's network block list when they see evidence of invalid data.
!!!

There are two callbacks that implement validation logic:

* `validate` is the core of the zome's validation logic. It receives a [**DHT operation**](/build/dht-operations/) and returns a success/failure/indeterminate result.

> * [`genesis_self_check`](/build/genesis-self-check-callback/) 'pre-validates' an agent's [**membrane proof**](/concepts/3_source_chain/#source-chain-your-own-data-store) before trying to connect to peers in the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [`genesis_self_check`](/build/genesis-self-check-callback/) 'pre-validates' your own agent's [**membrane proof**](/concepts/3_source_chain/#source-chain-your-own-data-store) before trying to connect to peers in the network.
```

Is that clearer?

Author: It didn't read quite clearly enough to me; I edited your suggestion -- does this still seem clear to you?

* While an entry or link can be thought of as 'things', the actions that create, update, or delete them are verbs. Validating a whole action lets you not just check the content and structure of your things, but also enforce write privileges and even throttle an agent's frequency of writes by looking at the action's place in their source chain.
* Validation rules should **always yield the same true/false outcome** for a given operation regardless of who is validating them and when. Don't use any source of non-determinism, such as instantiating and comparing two `std::time::Instant`s. In fact Holochain prevents your validation callbacks from calling any non-deterministic host functions. Read more about the [available host functions](#available-host-functions).

> * Data may have dependencies that affect validation outcomes, but those dependencies must be [addressable](/build/identifiers/), they must be retrievable from the same DHT, and their addresses must be constructable from data in the operation being validated. (Note that because an action references the action preceding it on an agent's source chain, this is a dependency you don't need to build into your data.) If dependencies can't be retrieved at validation time, the `validate` callback terminates early with an [indeterminate result](/build/validate-callback/#validation-outcomes), which will cause Holochain to try again later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Data may have dependencies that affect validation outcomes, but those dependencies must be [addressable](/build/identifiers/), they must be retrievable from the same DHT, and their addresses must be known. (Note that because an action references the action preceding it on an agent's source chain, this is a dependency you don't need to build into your data.) If dependencies can't be retrieved at validation time, the `validate` callback terminates early with an [indeterminate result](/build/validate-callback/#validation-outcomes), which will cause Holochain to try again later.
```

> * When multiple actions are written in a same [atomic transaction](/build/zome-functions/#atomic-transactional-commits), actions' ops can only have dependencies on prior actions committed in the transaction, not later actions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Despite that multiple actions can be written within an [atomic transaction](/build/zome-functions/#atomic-transactional-commits), they are *not* validated together as an atomic transaction. An action can only have dependencies on prior actions, not subsequent actions.
```

* You don't need to validate your data manually before committing --- Holochain [validates it after the zome function that writes it is finished](/build/zome-functions/#validate-dht-operations), and returns any validation failure to the caller.

> * **Test, test, test.** Validation is the gate that accepts or rejects all DHT data, so make sure you write thorough test coverage for your validation functions. If the data being validated has no dependencies on DHT data or DNA/zome info, we recommend writing Rust unit tests for the [validation function stubs](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that the scaffolding tool generates. We also recommend testing your validation code by writing single- and multiple-agent [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/) test scenarios for zome functions that write data (we'll write about Tryorama soon; in the meantime, you can check the Tryorama GitHub readme and the scaffolded tests in a project's `tests/src/` folder for guidance).<!-- TODO: link to Tryorama page -->

Reviewer: > actions' ops can only have dependencies on prior actions committed in the transaction, not later actions.

Technically this is a *should not* rather than a *cannot* but probably best to document it that way :D Structural references that sys validation will check must be in the right direction. There's nothing stopping you mixing things up in app validation but it will slow down validation and if you create a circular dependency then it will stall validation.

> we recommend writing Rust unit tests for the

I personally wouldn't do this. Constructing the Holochain types as test data is not straight forward. You actually need to know quite a lot about how to construct them for this to work and even then, you have to know the inputs to validation well enough to construct good test cases. It can be done, I wouldn't bother.

> * **Test, test, test.** Validation is the gate that accepts or rejects all DHT data, so make sure you write thorough test coverage for your validation functions. If the data being validated has no dependencies on DHT data or DNA/zome info, we recommend writing Rust unit tests for the [validation function stubs](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that the scaffolding tool generates. We also recommend testing your validation code by writing single- and multiple-agent [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/) test scenarios for zome functions that write data (we'll write about Tryorama soon; in the meantime, you can check the Tryorama GitHub readme and the scaffolded tests in a project's `tests/src/` folder for guidance).<!-- TODO: link to Tryorama page -->

Author: > There's nothing stopping you mixing things up in app validation but it will slow down validation

Okay, I'm afraid to ask, in case you cook up something like [this](https://github.com/holochain/docs-pages/pull/520#issuecomment-2675264660) again... how can an earlier action know/include the hash of a later action in its data?

> * **Test, test, test.** Validation is the gate that accepts or rejects all DHT data, so make sure you write thorough test coverage for your validation functions. If the data being validated has no dependencies on DHT data or DNA/zome info, we recommend writing Rust unit tests for the [validation function stubs](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that the scaffolding tool generates. We also recommend testing your validation code by writing single- and multiple-agent [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/) test scenarios for zome functions that write data (we'll write about Tryorama soon; in the meantime, you can check the Tryorama GitHub readme and the scaffolded tests in a project's `tests/src/` folder for guidance).<!-- TODO: link to Tryorama page -->

Reviewer: Oh nothing quite so nasty in this case. Within a zome call, you might create multiple things. You could compute an entry hash and create a link to it, then do the create that brings the entry into existence. That is atomic from the point of view of the caller and the actions still appear in the right order to an agent activity authority but somebody validating that this particular link type points to entries is likely going to have do multiple passes to resolve this.

> * **Test, test, test.** Validation is the gate that accepts or rejects all DHT data, so make sure you write thorough test coverage for your validation functions. If the data being validated has no dependencies on DHT data or DNA/zome info, we recommend writing Rust unit tests for the [validation function stubs](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that the scaffolding tool generates. We also recommend testing your validation code by writing single- and multiple-agent [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/) test scenarios for zome functions that write data (we'll write about Tryorama soon; in the meantime, you can check the Tryorama GitHub readme and the scaffolded tests in a project's `tests/src/` folder for guidance).<!-- TODO: link to Tryorama page -->

Author: oh yeah, guess you could link to an uncreated entry -- I was thinking linking to an uncreated action, which seemed impossible :)

> * **Test, test, test.** Validation is the gate that accepts or rejects all DHT data, so make sure you write thorough test coverage for your validation functions. If the data being validated has no dependencies on DHT data or DNA/zome info, we recommend writing Rust unit tests for the [validation function stubs](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that the scaffolding tool generates. We also recommend testing your validation code by writing single- and multiple-agent [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/) test scenarios for zome functions that write data (we'll write about Tryorama soon; in the meantime, you can check the Tryorama GitHub readme and the scaffolded tests in a project's `tests/src/` folder for guidance).<!-- TODO: link to Tryorama page -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Test, test, test.** Validation is the gate that accepts or rejects all DHT data, so make sure you write thorough test coverage for your validation functions. We recommend testing your validation code by writing [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/) test scenarios for zome functions that write data (we'll write about Tryorama soon; in the meantime, you can check the Tryorama GitHub readme and the scaffolded tests in a project's `tests/src/` folder for guidance).<!-- TODO: link to Tryorama page -->
```

Author: https://github.com/holochain/docs-pages/pull/520/commits/faf557f1eadb372666a4ab4bfba9fb56ae7320d8

> * **Test, test, test.** Validation is the gate that accepts or rejects all DHT data, so make sure you write thorough test coverage for your validation functions. If the data being validated has no dependencies on DHT data or DNA/zome info, we recommend writing Rust unit tests for the [validation function stubs](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that the scaffolding tool generates. We also recommend testing your validation code by writing single- and multiple-agent [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/) test scenarios for zome functions that write data (we'll write about Tryorama soon; in the meantime, you can check the Tryorama GitHub readme and the scaffolded tests in a project's `tests/src/` folder for guidance).<!-- TODO: link to Tryorama page -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Test, test, test.** Validation is the gate that accepts or rejects all DHT data, so make sure you write thorough test coverage for your validation functions. If the data being validated has no dependencies on DHT data or DNA/zome info, we recommend writing Rust unit tests for the [validation function stubs](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that the scaffolding tool generates. We also recommend testing your validation code by writing single- and multiple-agent [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/) test scenarios for zome functions that write data. This lets you check that your validation rules pass both when authoring data and checking data authored by other agents. (we'll write about Tryorama soon; in the meantime, you can check the Tryorama GitHub readme and the scaffolded tests in a project's `tests/src/` folder for guidance).<!-- TODO: link to Tryorama page -->
```

Reviewer: Keen to include the why there. We can skip going into detail about how
